[MUSIC PLAYING]
>>NARRATOR: Thinking
aloud, conversations
on the leading edge of
knowledge and discovery
with psychologist
Jeffrey Mishlove.
>>JEFFREY MISHLOVE:
Hello, and welcome.
I'm Jeffrey Mishlove.
And today, we're going
to explore goddesses
in older women.
My guest is Dr.
Jean Shinoda Bolen--
a Jungian analyst and clinical
professor at the University
of California San
Francisco Medical Center.
Dr. Bolen is the author
of numerous books,
including "Close To The Bone,"
"The Dow of Psychology,"
"Goddesses in everywoman",
"Gods in everyman,"
and "Goddesses in Older Women--
Becoming a Juicy Crome."
Welcome, Jean.
>>JEAN SHINODA BOLEN:
Good to be with you again.
>>JEFFREY: It's a
pleasure to be with you.
The whole question of
the archetypal energies
that infused people
as they age I think
is coming more to the forefront
now because of the baby boomer
generation and the aging
of that generation.
>>JEAN: It's especially
coming to the fore
because we are the
generation of women
that have been
defining ourselves
every decade since the
women's movement began.
So as this generation gets
older, there's a redefinition.
There is a noticing that at
50, we don't feel very old.
And there's this energy
that we now have.
And we look ahead and see women
who are 60, 70, 80, even 90,
who still have vitality.
And my inquiry is to what is
it that makes a woman juicy?
>>JEFFREY: And from the
perspective of a Jungian
psychotherapist,
you draw on the idea
of the power of an
archetypal energy
and that these archetypal
energies are classically
associated with the gods
and goddesses of mythology.
>>JEAN: Well, the
energies are present.
There are potentials
in everybody.
And when women have
not been allowed
to be figures of
wisdom or figures
of action or
compassion, they recede
into the collective unconscious.
But then as these energies
start to rise in women,
the patterns begin to reemerge.
And they do connect
with energies
that go back to ancient
myths and ancient goddesses
and current goddesses
for that matter.
>>JEFFREY: And if you look at
the study today of mythology
and folklore and
archeology, we're seeing,
I suppose, literally
of what you could
call the rise of the goddess,
the remembering of the fact
that there were goddess cultures
that were very vibrant at one
time on this planet and for
much of the last 2,000 year
period of the
monotheistic dominance.
These goddess cultures
have been suppressed.
>>JEAN: And it's
fascinating that it's
coincided with the
women's movement
that there was a remembering
or finding the Gnostic Gospels.
The early Christian
had a sense of Sophia
as a feminine
aspect of divinity.
There's Marija
Gimbutas digging up
all kinds of things that
show us the way to an earlier
pre-patriarchal culture.
And but from an
archetypal energy
or psychological potentiality,
which interests me most of all,
they serve as--
Jung said that unlived out
archetypes in the culture still
exist.
And when energy flows, it's
like finding old water beds that
go underground rivers that just
channeled through the pattern.
And that's what I'm
naming, is the patterns
that are emerging in
a generation of women
who are older,
meaning postmenopausal
in the third phase as
in maiden mother crown,
or in our individual
act threes, that
what do we do with act
three of our lives?
What kind of
energies might there
be potentially in
all older women, who,
if they tap into it,
they've got new vitality.
>>JEFFREY: Well, in
your classic book,
which is I think a best seller
now, "Goddesses in everywoman,"
you refer to the
olympian goddesses, who
are rather well-known.
We have Hera and
Athena and Aphrodite.
But in this book, while you
touch on those goddesses,
you're also looking at some
of the goddesses who have
been hidden more in mythology.
>>JEAN: Absolutely,
because the Greek gods
and patriarchal
mythology favors women
as maidens or as mature
women who are embodied
and can be made into statuary.
And the patriarchy has
never been very interested
in women in their elder years.
And in fact, women are supposed
to become invisible and fade
into the woodwork.
And if for some 300 or 400
years to be an outspoken woman
brought you to the
inquisition into the stake,
it was a survival tactic
to become invisible.
>>JEFFREY: Some of the words
we use for elderly women,
like hag or crone,
in our culture
have a negative connotation.
But you're working
to revive more the...
a deeper understanding
of these words.
>>JEAN: Well, that was
one of the challenges.
There aren't any good
words for older women.
That tells you something about
the projections and prejudices
against becoming an
older woman if you
can't find a decent
word that isn't
colored in a negative way.
Crone is colored
in a negative way
because it's usually put
together with dried up
and old, right,
or what have you.
So when I start to
look at this age group
and see that this is
far from the case,
and to then refer to a
green and juicy crone,
that's a whole different image.
And that juicy and crone
together redeem the word crone.
Now hag is a perfectly
dreadful word, really.
I mean, it conotates
all kinds of images.
And yet, it came
from the word meaning
holy one, or saintly one.
In hagiography,
the study of saints
comes from that same root word.
But it, like women, and older
women, negativized, demonized,
trivialized, et cetera.
It becomes a very negative word.
That one is beyond
redemption at this point.
>>JEFFREY: Well, you refer,
I think, to the great church
in Constantinople,
the Hagia Sophia.
>>JEAN: It was
really the Christian,
the Eastern Christian
continued to have an affinity
toward the great mother.
And it was great wisdom, the
great wise mother Hagia Sophia.
And when the Western
Christian looked at that name,
the association was
with a very minor saint
as if there would be this
magnificent structure,
dedicated to a minor saint.
That was an image of
the continued connection
with a great mother.
That's true of many the great
cathedrals in Europe as well.
Chartres cathedral is--
>>JEFFREY: Notre Dame.
>>JEAN: Yes, right.
>>JEFFREY: Well, I feel
strongly about this myself.
It seems to me that when I
think of the esoteric wisdom,
traditions as best
I can see, they're
all based on the recovery of
the wisdom of the goddess,
of the feminine wisdom that
has been lost in our age.
And so the study
of these goddesses
is the study of all
sorts of hidden powers
that for me, as a man, I can
say that they are the birthright
of all humans, not just women.
And I'm excited to see powerful,
juicy crones in our era.
But I'm just as excited
for myself as for them.
>>JEAN: Well, archetypes
are present in all of us.
The male and female archetypes
But I think that a
woman in her third phase
is more likely to be in touch
with certain ones because
of her experience.
And what I did in describing
these goddesses was really
describe them as
ways to understand
the energies that arise.
So not everybody gets
wiser as they get older.
But the potential to get
wiser as you get older,
if you integrate the
experiences that you have,
and if you have certain talents
towards certain qualities
of wisdom, they mature.
They ripen.
They become truly
juicy qualities
when you're in the third phase.
So I took four obscure names
to personify those wisdom
energies.
There was Metis, who
was a pre olympian
goddess of wisdom,
who represents
a intellectual and
practical wisdom.
She was the first
wife of Zeus, gave him
the advice as to how he
could win Olympus and become
chief god.
And he tricked her into becoming
small and swallowed her.
>>JEFFREY: Because if we look
at the mythological history,
we see that the
olympian gods actually
vanquished an earlier group
of gods known as the Titans.
>>JEAN: And before that,
there was the feminine there,
began with Gaia, et cetera.
So there is this acknowledgment
in the mythology,
the traces of what came
before that fascinate me.
And if there is a
feminine wisdom,
isn't it interesting that
in the very mythology,
the example was that she was
tricked into becoming small
and swallowed by Zeus.
And then Zeus said that
he could counsel her.
He could get her
counsel from his belly.
But it's the kind
of wisdom that has
to do with, for example, if for
millennia, a woman could not
bring forth an idea or write
something or paint something
and put her name on it, then
obviously, if she contributed
to that theory idea
of painting, it
had her husband's name on it.
There was a swallowing up.
And even today, a
potential for women's
to be tricked into
becoming small, meaning
that she doesn't have
very much self-esteem,
she can put out an idea.
And someone else
can run with it.
>>JEFFREY: Very powerful.
Jean, powerful in
the sense that it
affects so many people today.
It speaks of a very real story.
We're about to
take a short break.
We'll be back.
Welcome back.
We're talking about
goddesses and older women
with Dr. Jean Shinoda Bolen.
And Jean, before our
break, you brought up
this very powerful example
of the goddess Metis,
who was swallowed up by Zeus.
And in your book,
you contrast her
with the goddess Athena, who is
like Zeus's favorite daughter
and often doesn't recognize the
power of the Metis archetype.
>>JEAN: Well,
that's a very-- now,
in contrast, the birth
of Athena is very famous.
She was supposedly born full
grown out of Zeus's head
and had no awareness
that she even
had a mother because her
mother was swallowed by Father.
And daughters of the
patriarchy, fathers, daughters,
often don't acknowledge or
see the value of the feminine
at all until somewhere along the
line often when they are older,
they begin to
realize that there's
a sub strata of wisdom that
is different from the energy
that they have been engaged
in the competitive achievement
oriented energies.
And if they start to
acquire a wisdom that
says they've got these skills,
they've got this education,
they've got this
intellect, and they've
added another dimension, often
that brings in the compassion
from the goddess, the
goddesses of compassion.
Wisdom and compassion are
true gifts of the third phase,
that you're not a
juicy human being,
much less a juicy
crone unless you
have those qualities of
wisdom and compassion.
Now in talking about
these goddesses,
I'm referring to them
as archetypal energies.
So each of them represents
a certain different kind
of wisdom for example.
There's a Sophia as
a wisdom that you--
the mystical wisdom,
the ones that you--
like in gnosticism, where
the word begins with the word
G-N-O. I like that.
There's a wisdom that
you gno as well as
the wisdom that is the more
logical kinds of knowledge
that you have.
And the mystic knows things
directly, knows something
about the nature of the
sacred, knows something
about the connection
with the divinity that
may be experienced in
many different situations.
Rather than taking
the words of somebody
about what they should
believe, the mystical woman
has a direct experience.
And that is a real wisdom.
And then there's
the wisdom that has
to do with Hecate or Hek-ate,
the goddess of the crossroad.
She is a true intuitive
one who knows because she
has gone through her dissents.
She knows she's recovered
from life's difficulties.
She's learned from experience.
>>JEFFREY: Now, this
is a goddess often
associated with witchcraft.
>>JEAN: She's been demonized
because she certainly
is the archetype
of the midwife who
knows about the transitions
in labor and delivery.
And she's also
that part of women
who are very comfortable being
with people who are dying
or sick.
They're not afraid of that
particular liminal phase
from this world to the next.
And it's also the archetype
of the therapist who
helps people when they
get to a crossroad
to the fork in the road.
That's where she
lived so to speak.
She was the goddess of
the fork in the road.
When you had a major
transition or a choice to make,
you'd come to that fork in
the road metaphorically.
And it's Hecate's wisdom
that can guide you
as to which path to take.
>>JEFFREY: Now another goddess
who has been demonized clearly
is Kali from the
Hindu tradition.
>>JEAN: Yes, Kali and Sekhmet,
the lion headed goddess,
I put in the class of goddesses
of transformative wrath,
or the archetype of
enough is enough.
And it is something
that often women as they
enter perimenopause
and menopause,
they start to really take
a good look at their lives
up to this point.
And it is really a crossroad
time, a now or never
to get out of a dysfunctional
relationship or to change it.
And it's also the kind of
energies that women have
as they see what's
happening in the culture.
And third phase of
life women have a sense
of wanting to give back.
They know that their lives
are very different because
of the women's movement.
They now have
energy, time perhaps.
And giving back
might be then to say
enough is enough to some kind
of environmental or social
injustice.
>>JEFFREY: Like the
woman who founded
Mothers against
Drunk Driving would
be an example of the
embodiment of this archetype.
>>JEAN: Right, of
enough is enough.
Or the Million Moms March
that began this millennia
in Washington with all the women
marching and saying-- in fact,
they were saying,
too, that deaths
that were brought on by
the lack of gun control
enough is enough.
>>JEFFREY: Well, when
I interviewed you
some years ago about
"Goddesses in everywoman,"
I recall you said women have
to be careful about being
possessed by a goddess energy.
It's not always a healthy thing.
But my sense in reading
"Goddesses in older woman"
was a much more
favorable accounting
of these archetypal
energies and the role
that they can play in
the lives of older women.
>>JEAN: Because
there's a potential
that they're
balanced by the time
you are in your third phase.
But for example, if you
were to be carried away
by Sekhmet and Kali, then
it is that sense of you
are just so enraged, that
your anger is out of control,
and the you that is
this reasonable person
has been totally taken over
by this rathful energy.
And women are sometimes
afraid of their anger
because they suppressed
it for so long
that there's a fear that
they're going to go crazy
if they get angry, rather
than that this is just
a quality of
important energy that
is arising at a crossroad
time, that it is
time to say enough is enough.
>>JEFFREY: There's a
part of the myth of Kali
as I recall where she is out
slaying all the evil ones.
But she gets so caught up
in the blood lust of slaying
that she forgets herself
and needs to be healed.
>>JEAN: One of the
interesting things
is that the reason she's
on that battlefield at all
is that there were three major
demons that the male gods could
not defeat.
So if the world was
to be safe, then they
had to call forth goddess
energy to confront this evil.
And first came Durga.
And then out of
the head of Durga
came Kali, this hideous
appearing goddess.
And she could do the job.
But then there was a problem
of being carried away
by it until she found herself
stepping on the beautiful body
of her husband Shiva.
And she looked down.
And by looking at
him, looking at her,
she came back to her senses.
And often that is true
that if in the middle
of being caught up by
any kind of emotion,
someone connects with you
and reminds you of yourself.
Then you come back.
You don't get carried
away like Kali did.
>>JEFFREY: And the
Egyptian goddess Sekhmet
is an interesting
one, the lion headed
goddess, who is both the
goddess of healing and of war.
>>JEAN: Well, she's
the goddess that
was called force like Sekhmet.
When there were evil doers
that had to be confronted--
>>JEFFREY: Like Kali you mean?
>>JEAN: Right.
>>JEFFREY: Yes, she is Sekhmet.
>>JEAN: Sekhmet-- I'm sorry.
Sekhmet and Kali are so similar
that I merge them together.
And--
>>JEFFREY: Fierce.
>>JEAN: They're fierce.
The energies of
transformative wrath.
And there is such
a potential when
a woman is both wise and
strong and can be protective.
So that if you get into
a Kali Sekhmet phase,
and you know it's
in you to be that,
then anyone can turn to
you and know that they
can be defended by you.
It's sort of like mother bear.
>>JEFFREY: And you write about
the potential, an older woman,
to have this fierceness,
this fury, these almost
demonic goddesses, but
tempered by wisdom.
>>JEAN: And compassion.
And what's interesting is in our
Greek mythology as our heritage
in Western civilization,
there isn't a goddess
of transformative wrath.
There isn't a goddess
with that much power,
nor is there a
goddess of compassion.
There's Aphrodite, who's
a goddess of erotic love
and romance, but not compassion.
And in the east,
Guan Yin of China,
who's also Tara of Tibet
and Kannon of Japan,
are these powerful, important
goddesses of compassion.
And as you grow older,
that's one of the things that
grows if you are growing wiser.
You become compassionate.
>>JEFFREY: Well,
isn't there a sense
in the Western iconography that
the Virgin Mary, especially
in a statue like
the Pieta, seems
to be the very
embodiment of compassion?
>>JEAN: People appeal
to her because they
know that here is a figure
that has suffered and will
understand their pain.
And so the Catholics
have had an image
of the goddess of compassion
in the Virgin Mary.
And Americans have had in the
image of the Statue of Liberty,
that I think of as
Lady liberty, a symbol
of the compassionate
quality that
has drawn all kinds of
almost all immigrants
who come to America with a sense
that this is a country that
will embrace their hopes, gives
them freedom, opportunity.
And those lines on
the statue itself,
give me your tired, your
poor, your teeming masses,
yearning to breathe free, that's
a real offer of compassion.
And it isn't-- compassion isn't
the same as just feeling sorry
for.
Compassion and
action go together so
that to lend a helping hand or
to be like Tara stepping down
to enter the world, or older
women who are having compassion
for abused children,
or starving people,
or fearful intimidated
women might then step forth
to do something about it.
>>JEFFREY: I mean, there's a
sense that someone like Mother
Teresa was the embodiment
of this archetype,
or even princess
Diana before that.
>>JEAN: Yes, right,
because they were
women who acted on
compassion by taking action.
And it's very different
from just saying, well,
I feel your pain.
If you feel the pain
of someone, what
do you do to help the pain,
to heal the situation?
And that's one of the
most important things
we can do as
individuals in our lives
is to help suffering people.
>>JEFFREY: Compassion
is probably the highest
of all spiritual gifts.
Dr. Jean Shinoda Bolen, what
a pleasure exploring with you
these powerful energies
that are greening
our world and our civilization.
Thanks so much
for being with me.
>>JEAN: It's a pleasure.
>>JEFFREY: And thank
you for being with us.
[MUSIC PLAYING]